I'd come to South Africa had
launched myself into exploration
and out I went looking to
combine these technologies
satellite imagery and handheld
GPS started mapping sites i saw
that cave sites formed in linear
lines myself fossil sites
cluster together and treat me so
much i put together a list of
targets print them on an a4 she
loaded my dog into the car and
on the first day out of 121 new
cave sites became an addictive
process by july that year 2008
I found more than 600 cave sites
i discovered more than 60 new
fossil sites and I thought this
was my legacy is fantastic
this will be my gift to future
generations of these discoveries
began in a situation that i
found myself in back in the
nineteen nineties the situation
where exploration appeared to
have been finished in the field
paleoanthropology in the search
for human origins
I found my own University
closing my exploration program i
found myself in a situation of
assisting in a job search to
find a new director to push the
paleoanthropology the human
origin study in a new direction
towards technology towards the
application of using modern
technology to study existing
fossils not to find new ones
a young man that was going to
take over my directorship
position and leaders in the new
direction was killed in a
motorcycle accident in London
but we'd already invested in
that direction we had a
postdoctoral students computers
everything and one of them a
young Kenya named Jackie came
into my office and said would I
be his postdoctoral supervisor
now with this tragedy and I said
no because I can't be your a lab
guy i will feel God and I just
found this site
it's bugging me if you want to
learn to be a field guide let's
go out to the site and see what
has to offer
august fifteenth 2008 job myself
a dog towel my then
nine-year-old son mathew
you walked up to the side i got
to the edge of it we're looking
around I said go find fossils
and with that off Matthew and
towel win and I was talking to
Joe and I said you know I don't
know why they left this little
hole miners it actually found
this and just put a couple of
blasts into it but then they
left it and as I finish saying
that Matthew who is now 15 yards
off the site in the middle of
grass says dad I found a fossil
I almost didn't go and look but
he's my nine-year-old son and I
like all of you you want to
encourage fossil hunting so I
started walking towards him and
this is what I saw and five
meters away I knew his in my
life we're going to change
forever
it's sticking out the side of
that rock i saw a hominid
clavicle
Matthew says I cursed I don't
remember that and i turn the
rock over and they're sticking
out the back of it was a John a
tooth and that would lead to an
extraordinary time
Matthew had found a skeleton one
of the rarest things you can
ever find that skeleton would be
part of this skull
we would eventually find another
one and then another one and
then another one and then
another one we would call that
little site malapa and it would
for a moment in history be one
of if not the richest early
hominid site on the continent of
Africa skeletons in remarkable
pristine condition
the organic material I threw
myself into this
this was a paleoanthropologist
cool equipment of winning the
lottery
we don't find these things over
the years following that 2011
2012 2013 we would have the time
of our scientific lives
something like 15 papers in the
journal Science more in the
journal Nature dozens of
peer-reviewed articles it was
living a scientific dream it was
our version of a scientific
lottery all from a little site
that looks like that
a hole in the ground and i
realized at that moment
this is about june july of 2013
that I had made an error that
error was pretty fundamental in
pretty simple i had not been
exploring since Matthew it said
dad I found a fossil
I'd literally won the lottery
why would you fair enough to say
that i was putting together this
great scientific team
we're producing this research
but I had not gone back out and
gone to those hundreds and
hundreds and hundreds of sites
that i discovered walking those
hills and so I decided to go
back out in the field but if you
can imagine that this landscape
is less than 45 minutes outside
of the city of johannesburg
looks like that and when you
look at that you probably see
one of these beautiful rolling
African landscapes
that's not what I see I see a
giant block of swiss cheese
because underneath that
dolomitic limestone our network
of hundreds of kilometers of
caves but most of them are not
these big cavernous type caves
that some of you may envision
when you hear the word cave
most of them are these small
narrow trenches ins and splits
in the ground forming along
ancient fault lines and I was
thinking how am I going to do
this
I had done cave exploration in
this region back in the nineteen
nineties and I had looked and
squeeze my way through these
things in the nineties and it
not found much as I was thinking
how i would move forward with a
exploration program to take my
surface images and move them
underground a pirate walked into
my office
it was a former student of mine
Pedro boshoff he had gone off
diamond prospecting in central
Africa and failed and it come
back destitute and said I made a
mistake I paleoanthropologist my
love please can you give me a
job
I want to get back into it and I
said you know your timing is
good
I want to get underground and
petrol quickly found out
something that I already knew
that like me he had no longer
become physiologically
appropriate for much of this
underground work
these are narrow squeezes but I
said you know get out there and
go to the areas we know the best
I had learned something from
allah and so he went to the
caving club and found two young
men who were physiologically
appropriate on the right was
Rick hunter who was a member of
mensa who had been kicked out of
high school for blowing up the
high school science lab that is
a true story and was working as
a builder and on the left Steve
Tucker an accountant by day we
showed them what we were looking
for kind of cast photographs and
sent them into some of these
deeper recesses Stephen Rick
went into the site that they
expected the least from perhaps
the best known cave site in
South Africa if not in Africa
the rising star system
it was completely mapped or so
they thought
until they work their way on
that late evening up an area
after spending four and a half
hours going to torturous sort of
little squeezes and crevices up
a thing that's called dragon's
back on the map a series of
collapses it's knife-edge they
were 40 meters underground they
climbed about 20 meters to look
down a little slot those seven
and a half inches wide into the
darkness and of course they went
down down more than 60 feet into
this narrow slot squeezing their
way and not knowing if it was
going to open up at any time and
down you drop at the bottom
entered a little narrow passage
and there they began to
immediately see small white bits
on the ground that look like
bones they followed them in
which led to a slightly larger
chamber and they are they saw a
material on the ground they
thought looked a lot like what I
told them we were looking for
october first 2013 i was sitting
at home
the front inner comment my gate
went and picked up the intercom
and their voice said you're
gonna want to let us in it was
creepy just like that
there's petrol and I open the
gate eventually and let them in
and there
Steve opened up his laptop and I
saw the most extraordinary
pictures I thought I would never
see in my life
yeah